# TreeMap Methods

## Reference Data Prep

- Changes from 2016: 
    - Ride-along fix

Reference data refers to the FIA-derived attributes that are used as reference/predictive variables in the imputation. These include: 

## Map Attribute Data Prep
- Changes from 2016: 
    - Calculated SDI and QMD for plots from all CONUS. Previously, these variable were available only for plots surveyed by the Rocky Mountain Research Station. 

Map attribute data refers to those FIA-derived attributes that are not modeled directly, but are reported as attribute layers in the final map outputs. 

## Target Data Prep
- Changes from 2016: 
    - Climate data obtained from DayMet 1981-2010 30-year normals, rather than Landfire Biophysical variables. We made this change in order to have more control over the processing of the climate variables and ensure that they were reproducible, rather than using the identical climate variables from landfire, which created consistency between the TreeMap product and Landfire but the layers were difficult to access and because they were generated by another project, we weren't able to make adjustments to the layers when desired to improve our modeling. 
    - We also used a slightly different assortment of climate variables for the 2020/2022 version. 

Target layers included in the model:


### Topo layer prep 
- Minimal changes from 2016 Method
- For 2020/2022: Used topographic layers from Landfire: Elevation, Slope, and Aspect from Landfire2020
    - Elevation: m
    - Slope: degrees
    - Aspect: [units]
- Converted aspect to northing and easting using equations:
    - northing = cos((pi/180)*aspect)
    - easting = sin((pi/180)*aspect)
- Correct an issue with northing and easting to ensure that where aspect = -1, northing and easting = 0
  northing_zone <- mask(northing_zone, aspect_zone, maskvalues=-1, updatevalue=0)
  easting_zone <- mask(easting_zone, aspect_zone, maskvalues=-1, updatevalue=0)
  
### Vegetation Layer initial Prep
- Minimal changes from 2016 method
- For 2020/2022: Used EVT, EVC, and EVH layers from Landfire version corresponding to appropriate year
- Vegetation layer prep happens on a zone-wise basis, following Landfire zones

#### Existing Vegetation Cover (EVC)
- Reclass raw EVC values into classes of Tree Cover that match the middle value in each range of tree cover values (Table). The original values in the Attribute table for EVC can be inspected [here](https://landfire.gov/sites/default/files/DataDictionary/2024/LF24_EVCADD.pdf)

| Raw EVC Value    | EVC Reclass|
| ---------------- | -------    |
| -9999            | NA         |
| 1-109            | NA         |
| 110-119          | 15         |
| 120-129          | 25         |
| 130-139          | 35         |
| 140-149          | 45         |
| 150-159          | 55         |
| 160-169          | 65         |
| 170-179          | 75         |
| 180-189          | 85         |
| 190-199          | 95         |
| 200-399          | NA         |

This EVC layer is used as a preliminary forest mask. 

#### Existing Vegetation Height (EVH)

- Reclass raw EVH values into classes of Existing Vegetation height. [Original EVH Attribute Table](https://landfire.gov/sites/default/files/DataDictionary/2024/LF24_EVHADD.pdf)

| Raw EVH Value    | EVH Reclass| Class Description |
| ---------------- | -------    | ------- |
| -9999            | NA         | NA value      |
| 0-100            | NA         | Other vegetation types     |
| 101-105          | 3          | Tree height: 1-5m   |
| 105-110          | 8          | Tree height: 6-10m  |
| 111-125          | 18         | Tree height: 11-25m |
| 126-150          | 38         | Tree height: 25-50m |
| 151-199          | NA         | Tree height: >50m (not present in CONUS) |
| 200-399          | NA         | Other vegetation types |
        
#### Existing Vegetation Type (EVT)

- We start with the Landfire Existing Vegetation Type (EVT) layer. We reclassify EVT to the corresponding Existing Vegetation Type Group (EVT_GP), which is a broader category that we use for modeling. There are several EVT_GPs that we convert to NA. 

| EVT GP   | Reclass Value| Class Description |
|----------|--------------|-------------------|
|  13      |              |                   |
|  14      |              |                   |
|  15      |              |                   |
|  26      |              |                   |
|  60      |              |                   |
|  730     |              |                   |


#### 'Ride-along problem' and fix

- Problem: In TreeMap 2016, Plots were being imputed to zones where the EVT_GP in the zone was not present. Eg, confier species only present in California might be imputed to Wisconsin. The problem was: how do we limit the plots available, geographically, to prevent imputing plots with species that are certainly not in the imputed area? 
- Fix: Limit plots available for imputation in each zone to those plots with species that are present in the zone being imputed, or any of the landfire zones that border the zone being imputed. 
- Insert a map of landfire zones for context
- Example: If we are imputing Landfire zone 1, (PNW, North Cascades). Within zone 1 and its bordering zones, say 18 EVT groups are present. Only plots that contain one of those 18 EVT groups will be included in the zone-specific x-table for that zone.
- This also requires that every EVT group in a zone is present in both the Landfire EVT layer and the X table. If there are any EVT gps that re not present in either dataset, the unmatched EVT groups are reclassified to nearest-matching appropriate groups based on expert opinion. 

- Table of reclassed evt groups, for final mask and reclass stage

### Climate Layer Prep
- List of climate vars: 
  Maximum temperature
  Minimum temperature
  Precipitation
  Vapour Pressure Deficit
  Vapour Pressure Deficit
  Soil Water Equivalent (SWE)
  Solar Radiation
  

- Download data from Daymet using daymet R package

### Disturbance Layer Prep

- Changes from 2016 (or 2014) method: NA
- FSIC GO refactored code to make it more modular

### Final masking
- Each zone is applied a tree mask. TreeMask is derived from EVC > 10% tree
- Fill holes in DayMet data

## Imputation

Changes from 2016 method:  
- refactored code base for efficiency and modularity
- parallelized zone imputation by tile for computational efficiency
- methodology remains basically the same

### Build imputation model 



### Apply imputation model and assemble tiles
Changes from 2016 method:


### Assemble imputation output to CONUS-wide

## Zonal Evaluation
- Changes from 2016: 
    - Model evaluation run synchronously with model creation
    - Target Layer Comparison includes new vars
    - Cross-validation method is all new

### Model evaluation
- 

### Target Layer Comparison



### Cross-validation

- All-new method for 2020/2022
- k-fold cross-validation with 10 folds
- to evaluate accuracy / stability of imputed attribute variables

#### CV Methods
- Drop any plots with that have EVT_GPs that are present in <0.3% of plots: these EVT_GPs are too rare to be represented in cross-validation

## National Evaluation

### 